README.md, before:

# The Biker's Dream - Bike Sharing Web app
SOEN 343 Project – The Biker's Dream ( Fall 2025 )

---

## Team Members
| GitHub Username | Full Name           | Student ID |
|-----------------|------------------|-----------|
| @masspaol       | Massimo Paolini   | 40280323  |
| @elif5446       | Elif Sag Sesen    | 40283343  |
| @afkcya         | Ya Yi (Yuna) Chen | 40286042  |
| @RyanCheung03   | Ryan Cheung       | 40282200  |
| @ammarranko     | Ammar Ranko       | 40281232  |
| @nicoledesigns  | Nicole Antoun     | 40284018  |

---

# 🚲 The Bikers’ Dream – Interactive Bike Sharing Web App

**The Bikers’ Dream** is a modern, secure, and interactive bike-sharing web application that delivers **real-time station updates, seamless rentals, transparent billing, and role-based management**.

The application combines a **responsive React frontend**, a **Java Spring Boot backend**, and a **PostgreSQL relational database** to provide a reliable, production-ready experience for riders, operators, and administrators. It simulates a real-world bike-sharing platform similar to BIXI, focusing on scalability, data integrity, and clean system design.


---

## ✨ Key Features

### 🗺️ Interactive Station Map
- Real-time visualization of bike stations using **Leaflet + OpenStreetMap**
- Live station status (active/inactive)
- Dock-level availability (empty, available, reserved)
- Visual indicators for:
  - Available bikes
  - Reserved bikes
  - E-bikes vs standard bikes
 
    
 <img width="959" height="866" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/18fbff05-91f4-448a-9932-cb1fa518ef1e" />


### 🚴 Bike Rental & Reservation
- Reserve bikes directly from the map
- Rent bikes instantly if available
- Return bikes to any compatible station
- Real-time rental state tracking

<img width="1225" height="747" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d9a7148f-72a6-4437-923a-d325d8b09efd" />


### 🔐 Role-Based User Experience
- **Riders**: rent, reserve, return bikes, view trips & billing
- **Admins / Operators**:
  - Monitor station occupancy and maintenance 
  - Track rentals and reservations
  - View system-wide trip and billing history
 
<img width="1087" height="892" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bbab596c-7fd3-441e-b052-ab59aefc6b1f" />


### 📊 Trip History & Search
- Detailed trip history per user
- Filter trips by:
  - Trip ID
  - Date range
  - Bike type
- View start/end stations, duration, and bike details

  <img width="1074" height="557" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/670ef2f2-7964-4252-9286-b768afda2cae" />


### 💳 Transparent Billing System
- Automatic bill generation after each ride
- Pricing plans:
  - **Standard Bike**
  - **E-Bike**
- Breakdown includes:
  - Base fee
  - Per-minute rate
  - Total cost
- Pending and paid bill tracking
- Account summary with total trips & outstanding balance

<img width="1210" height="793" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ff8553d1-ac4a-4eda-98e8-b38c0ebb873c" />



---

## 🧠 System Overview






## Requirements
Before running the application, ensure you have the following installed:

- **JDK**: version 25  
- **Maven**: version 3.5.6  
- **Node.js & npm** (for React frontend)  

---

## Running the Application

1. **Open two terminal windows**:
   - One for the frontend  
   - One for the backend  

2. **Backend Setup** (in the backend terminal):
   ```bash
   cd backend/tbd
   mvn clean install    # Run this only if new dependencies were added
   mvn spring-boot:run
3. **Frontend Setup** (in the frontend terminal):
   ```bash
   cd frontend
   npm install          # Run this only if new dependencies were added
   npm start
4. Once both backend and frontend are running, the application will be available in your browser at the default React port <code>http://localhost:3000</code>.

Commit message:

Revise README for clarity and project details
Updated project description and enhanced clarity on features and architecture.

README.md, after:

# 🚲 The Bikers’ Dream – Interactive Bike Sharing Web App
SOEN 343 Project ( Fall 2025 )

**The Bikers’ Dream** is a modern, secure, and interactive bike-sharing web application that delivers **real-time station updates, seamless rentals, transparent billing, and role-based management**.

The application combines a **responsive React frontend**, a **Java Spring Boot backend**, and a **PostgreSQL relational database** to provide a reliable, production-ready experience for riders, operators, and administrators. It simulates a real-world bike-sharing platform similar to BIXI and follows a **layered architecture** (presentation, service, and persistence layers), emphasizing **scalability, data integrity, maintainability, and clean system design**.


---

## Team Members
| GitHub Username | Full Name           | Student ID |
|-----------------|------------------|-----------|
| @masspaol       | Massimo Paolini   | 40280323  |
| @elif5446       | Elif Sag Sesen    | 40283343  |
| @afkcya         | Ya Yi (Yuna) Chen | 40286042  |
| @RyanCheung03   | Ryan Cheung       | 40282200  |
| @ammarranko     | Ammar Ranko       | 40281232  |
| @nicoledesigns  | Nicole Antoun     | 40284018  |

---




---

## ✨ Key Features

### 🗺️ Interactive Station Map
- Real-time visualization of bike stations using **Leaflet + OpenStreetMap**
- Live station status (active/inactive)
- Dock-level availability (empty, available, reserved)
- Visual indicators for:
  - Available bikes
  - Reserved bikes
  - E-bikes vs standard bikes
 
    
 <img width="959" height="866" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/18fbff05-91f4-448a-9932-cb1fa518ef1e" />


### 🚴 Bike Rental & Reservation
- Reserve bikes directly from the map
- Rent bikes instantly if available
- Return bikes to any compatible station
- Real-time rental state tracking

<img width="1225" height="747" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d9a7148f-72a6-4437-923a-d325d8b09efd" />


### 🔐 Role-Based User Experience
- **Riders**: rent, reserve, return bikes, view trips & billing
- **Admins / Operators**:
  - Monitor station occupancy and maintenance 
  - Track rentals and reservations
  - View system-wide trip and billing history
 
<img width="1087" height="892" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bbab596c-7fd3-441e-b052-ab59aefc6b1f" />


### 📊 Trip History & Search
- Detailed trip history per user
- Filter trips by:
  - Trip ID
  - Date range
  - Bike type
- View start/end stations, duration, and bike details

  <img width="1074" height="557" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/670ef2f2-7964-4252-9286-b768afda2cae" />


### 💳 Transparent Billing System
- Automatic bill generation after each ride
- Pricing plans:
  - **Standard Bike**
  - **E-Bike**
- Breakdown includes:
  - Base fee
  - Per-minute rate
  - Total cost
- Pending and paid bill tracking
- Account summary with total trips & outstanding balance

<img width="1210" height="793" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ff8553d1-ac4a-4eda-98e8-b38c0ebb873c" />



---

## 🧠 System Overview






## Requirements
Before running the application, ensure you have the following installed:

- **JDK**: version 25  
- **Maven**: version 3.5.6  
- **Node.js & npm** (for React frontend)  

---

## Running the Application

1. **Open two terminal windows**:
   - One for the frontend  
   - One for the backend  

2. **Backend Setup** (in the backend terminal):
   ```bash
   cd backend/tbd
   mvn clean install    # Run this only if new dependencies were added
   mvn spring-boot:run
3. **Frontend Setup** (in the frontend terminal):
   ```bash
   cd frontend
   npm install          # Run this only if new dependencies were added
   npm start
4. Once both backend and frontend are running, the application will be available in your browser at the default React port <code>http://localhost:3000</code>.
